---
title:  "Lecture Notes: CFI on Embedded Systems"
date:   2019-04-25 09:00:00
categories: notes lecture 
layout: post
---


Today we are going to talk about an implementation of CFI tailored to realtime
embedded systems. The focus on realtime embedded systems leads to two major
distinctions between this implementation, called **RECFISH**, and Classic CFI
as it is described in the original Abadi et al. paper. 

First, RECFISH targets systems that do no have a memory management unit (MMU).
In other words, these systems do not have virtual memory or fine-grained (i.e.,
page-level) memory permissions. The lack of an MMU means that RECFISH has to
add some additional protection mechanisms to ensure that CFI is enforced; for
example, RECFISH implements secure context switching which is something we
don't have to worry about on a general purpose system.

Second, RECFISH targets real-time systems and, consequently, has to adhere to
strict timing requirements. In real-time systems, the designer cares first and
foremost about a metric called  **scheduleability**, which we loosely define
as: all tasks finish executing before their deadline.

Let's start with a little background.

### What is an embedded system?

The computing devices you are most familiar with---laptops, desktops, iPads,
and phones---all fall into the category of **general-purpose** systems. Today
our focus is on cheaper, but significantly less capable, **embedded systems**.
By less capable, I mean less memory, a fraction of the computing power, and a
much simpler hardware architecture. An example system would be an implantable
medical device or the hardware/software running in your car (except for the
"info-tainment" console). 

Embedded systems don't run operating systems as you know them (e.g.,
Windows or Ubuntu). Instead, their software either runs directly on the
device---called **bare-metal execution**---or inside of a special purpose OS---such
as *FreeRTOS*. Really, it is more accurate to think of an embedded OS simply as
a glorify library because there typically isn't any separate between kernel
and user space. 


### What is a realtime system?

A realtime system is one that has strict requirements on when and how long code
takes to execute. Typically, realtime systems run a realtime operating system
such as FreeRTOS. In FreeRTOS, you have a set of tasks to execute. These tasks
contain the program logic---i.e., what you want the system to do---and take a
known amount of time to execute (at least in the worst case). Importantly, each
task has a deadline by which it must finish executing. The job of the RTOS is
to schedule tasks such that they all finish executing by their deadlines.  In
the parlance of RTOS, you want your **task set** to be **scheduleable**. 

## How Does CFI fit in?

Embedded systems often run C code and thus they inherit the same memory errors
we have been discussing for general-purpose systems. Further, they suffer from
the same attacks. It makes sense that we would want to protect these systems
using control flow integrity.  That is the goal of RECFISH: Realtime Embedded
CFI for Secure Hardware. 

Unfortunately, we have a few additional challenges we need to solve to make CFI
work on an embedded system. First, embedded systems often use custom tool
chains tailored to specific boards. This means that we can't simply implement
CFI as a compiler pass in GCC and have it suddenly work on all embedded
systems. To increase the applicability of RECFISH, we want to *retrofit
existing/pre-compiled binaries* with RECFISH protections.  

Second, the RECFISH checks are going add additional overhead to each task. We
need to make sure those checks don't violate the real-time requirements of the
system. In other words, we need to show that the execution time of the checks
is deterministic (we know how long they will take to execute) and that this
overhead doesn't cause a task to miss it's deadline. We won't actually do into
the details of addressing this scheduleability requirement today.  

Third, we have to make sure everything works under the limited resources
afforded by an embedded system, both limited hardware (lack of MMU) and
software resources (no separation between user/kernel). 


### Attacker Model

Let's start by defining the capabilities of our attacker. In particular, we are
going to assume a strong attacker: one that can overwrite any location in
writeable memory at anytime. We want to use a strong attacker model because if
we can defend against a powerful attacker, we can also defend against a weaker
attacker. Note, this is the same attacker model considered the original CFI
paper. 


### Forward-Edge Checks

To understand how RECFISH protects the forward-edges, let's consider a simple
example function:

```C
int foo(int a, int b) {
  int (*function[2]) (int,int) = {add, sub};
  static unsigned int i = 0;
  return func[i++ % 2] (a, b);
}
```

Everytime foo is called foo will call either add or sub depending on which
function was called last. When compiled this function will include a indirect
branch:

```
#Note: this is ARM assembly, something we haven't talked much about in the
# course
add r3, r3, r4
blx r3
```


**Side Question:** How does add/sub() know where to return?  The ARM and ARM
Thumb instruction sets do things a little differently than x86.  In ARM the
return address is saved in a special register called the link register, hence
the 'l' in `bl`. In x86 the return address would be pushed on the stack via the
`call` instruction.


Similar to other fine-grained CFI approaches, RECFISH will instrument this
indirect branch to check for a legal label at the target (which is either `add`
or `sub` in a legal execution). The instrumentation will look like:

```
ldrh r0, [r3, 3] 
movw r1, <label>
cmp r0, r1
bne error
bx r3
```

First we grab the label that is embedded at the target. Then we compare it to a
label embedded in this check. If the two match, then `r3` contains a legal
target and we allow the branch. 

However, in the full implementation we have to address another complication
that arises because  our goal is retrofit existing binaries. In particular, we
have to figure out how to insert the RECFISH instrumentation without breaking
everthing.  Imagine if we simply made room for the new instructions by shifting
the everything down by `X` bytes (where `X` is size of the check). This wouldn't work
because it breaks a commonly used feature of the ARM instruction set called **relative addressing**. 

To illustrate relative addressing, consider the following example. This
instruction loades data from an address 32 bytes after the program counter
(Note, the program counter register serves the same purpose as the instruction
pointer register in x86):

```
ldr r1, [pc, #32]
```  

The ARM thumb instruction set is designed to produce small code and relative
addressing makes it easier to do that.  If we insert additional instruction, we
have to recalculate the relative offset to account for the size of the CFI
check. This recalucalation gets pretty complicated pretty fast, so RECFISH
instead trys to avoid this issue entirely.

To avoid this issue, RECFISH inserts **trampolines**, i.e., direct branches to
a special CFI code section that is added to an unused memory region.  These
branches take the place of the original indirect branch (plus the preceding
instruction). More concretely, indirect branch in foo(), `blx r3` is replaced
with: 

```
bl 0x13f80
```

This new branch targets new region of code with the CFI check.

```
add r3, r3, r4
push {r0, r1}
ldrh r0, [r3, 3] 
movw r1, <label>
cmp r0, r1
bne error
pop {r0, r1}
bx r3
```

Note, the trampoline (i.e., the direct branch) we added takes 4 bytes whereas
the original `blx` instruction only required 2 bytes. Thus our trampoline also
overwrites the `add` instruction before the `blx`. That's why our CFI check
begins with `add r3, r3, r4`.

In this  example, we covered how checks are performed at the call site of an
indirect branch. To make those checks work we have to also embed a label at the
target. We can do this by writing the function prologue with trampolines. So
the orginal prologue:

```
push {r4, r7, lr}
sub sp, 20
add r7, sp, 0
```
Is rewritten to:

```
b.w 0x13f60
<label>
```

### Global Uniqueness of Labels

Just like classic CFI, RECFISH also relies on a global uniqueness assumption on
the labels; In short, the 2-bytes representing the label must not show up
anywhere except for CFI checks.   Unlike classic CFI, the intrustmentation is
being added through binary retrofitting and not through the compiler.

One benefit of binary retrofitting is that it is straightforward to select
labels and guarantee the global uniqueness assumption, i.e., labels only appear
in the appropriate places. In short, we have exactly the code (and all of it,
i.e., no dynamic linking) that will execute on the device. All we need to do to
select labels is scan through the code base to collect all possible four-byte
sequences.


### Can an attacker manipulate this scheme?

Depends on what you mean by manipulate? There are attacks on CFI (see
control-flow juijutsu) below.

More precisely, can an attacker bypass CFI checks?  CFI relies on some basic
memory protections. First, the code section must be readonly, otherwise it is
trivial to modify or remove checks.  Second, writeable memory must be
non-executable. That way if an attacker loads their own code with a proper
label into memory it won't be executable. Third, context switches must be
secure. 

On a general purpose system, the *memory management unit (MMU)* would enforce the basic
memory permissions and the OS would handle context switching. On our target
embedded system, we have a *memory protection unit (MPU)* which provides some of
the same functionality as an MMU, but in a more limited fashion. If you want to
know how RECFISH solves the problem of context-switching, you should take a
look at the paper!
 

