---
title: "Writeup: stack6"
date: 2019-04-25 7:00:00
categories: writeup
layout: post
author: Gavin MacNeal
---

Stack6 is very similar to stack5, with one important difference. Here's the source code.

```c
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>

char* getpath()
{
  char buffer[64];
  unsigned int ret;

  printf("input path please: "); fflush(stdout);

  gets(buffer);

  ret = __builtin_return_address(0);

  if((ret & 0xf0000000) == 0xf0000000) {
      printf("bzzzt (%p)\n", ret);
      _exit(1);
  }

  printf("got path %s\n", buffer);

  return strdup(buffer);
}

int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
  getpath();
  return 0;
}
```
The check on the return address doesn't just stop you from returning to your shell code on the stack, you can no longer return to libc either. This introduces return to .text, or Return Oriented Programming.

The idea of Return Oriented Programming (ROP) is to use the program's code against itself. Clever attackers can find tiny segments of code, called "gadgets," to perform tasks for them. Gadgets are normally a few instructions that accomplish a small task, followed by a return instruction. Because these gadgets are part of the code itself, they have to be executable for the program to work. Finding these gadgets can be difficult, but luckily, other programmers have struggled for us. If you have the PEDA add-on for GDB, you can use the command ropsearch followed by the instruction you're looking for to find any addresses in the code where that instruction occurs closely followed by a return instruction.

For this problem, the only thing we need a ROP gadget to do for us is move us to an exploit after bypassing the return address check. The easiest way to get the program to jump wherever we want it? Another return instruction. Therefore, you should be able overwrite the return address with the address of any return instruction (even the very same one!) and then carry on with your normal return based attacks. When the program checks the return address, it will see an address that doesn't start with 0xff and allow you to continue normally. You then return to an additional return instruction. At this point, the second return instruction will then check the stack for an address to return to, and jump to that location, restriction free.

Let's recap. Here's what our exploit string looks like so far:

```
|| fill the buffer | overwite return address with address of new return instruction | address for attack to return to ||
```

All that's left is to determine where to return to. My first instinct was to go back to my stack4 solution and try to redirect the program to my nop-sled and shell code that was sitting on the stack in an environment variable. Unfortunately, I ran face first into a second protection that stack6 has added: the stack is no longer executable. This means that we need to jump somewhere else that is executable that will still allow us to access the flag. If you've done these problems in order, you need only look back at stack5 for the answer. libc still needs to be executable, so we can just go there and run system to pop a shell. Combining our exploit string so far with what we use in stack5, this gives us our final exploit string:

```
|| fill the buffer | return to return address | return to libc address | exit address (or filler address) | "/bin/sh" address ||
```

